---
title: Getting started
sidebar_position: 10
---

Connect is a slim library for building browser- and gRPC-compatible HTTP APIs.
You define your service with a Protocol Buffer schema, and Connect generates
type-safe server and client code. Fill in your server's business logic and
you're done &mdash; no hand-written marshaling, routing, or client code
required!

This fifteen-minute walkthrough helps you create a small Connect service in Go.
It demonstrates what you'll be writing by hand, what Connect generates for you,
and how to call your new API.

## Prerequisites

- You'll need one of the [last two major releases][go-releases] of Go. See Go's
  [Getting Started][install-go] guide for installation instructions.
- We'll also use [cURL][]. It's available from Homebrew and most Linux package
  managers.

## Install tools

First, we'll need to create a new Go module and install some code generation
tools:

```bash
$ mkdir connect-go-example
$ cd connect-go-example
$ go mod init example
$ go install github.com/bufbuild/buf/cmd/buf@latest
$ go install github.com/fullstorydev/grpcurl/cmd/grpcurl@latest
$ go install google.golang.org/protobuf/cmd/protoc-gen-go@latest
$ go install connectrpc.com/connect/cmd/protoc-gen-connect-go@latest
```

You'll need `buf`, `protoc-gen-go` and `protoc-gen-connect-go` on your `PATH`. If
`which buf grpcurl protoc-gen-go protoc-gen-connect-go` doesn't succeed, add Go's
install directories to your path:

```bash
$ [ -n "$(go env GOBIN)" ] && export PATH="$(go env GOBIN):${PATH}"
$ [ -n "$(go env GOPATH)" ] && export PATH="$(go env GOPATH)/bin:${PATH}"
```

## Define a service

Now we're ready to write the Protocol Buffer schema that defines our service.
In your shell,

```bash
$ mkdir -p greet/v1
$ touch greet/v1/greet.proto
```

Open `greet/v1/greet.proto` in your editor and add:

```protobuf
syntax = "proto3";

package greet.v1;

option go_package = "example/gen/greet/v1;greetv1";

message GreetRequest {
  string name = 1;
}

message GreetResponse {
  string greeting = 1;
}

service GreetService {
  rpc Greet(GreetRequest) returns (GreetResponse) {}
}
```

This file declares the `greet.v1` Protobuf package, a service called
`GreetService`, and a single method called `Greet` with its request and
response structures. These package, service, and method names will reappear
soon in our HTTP API's URLs.

## Generate code

We're going to generate our code using [Buf][buf], a modern replacement for
Google's protobuf compiler. We installed Buf earlier, but we also need a few
configuration files to get going. (If you'd prefer, you can skip this section
and use `protoc` instead &mdash; `protoc-gen-connect-go` behaves like any other
plugin.)

First, scaffold a basic [`buf.yaml`][buf.yaml] by running `buf mod init`. Next,
tell Buf how to generate code by putting this into
[`buf.gen.yaml`][buf.gen.yaml]:

```yaml
version: v1
plugins:
  - plugin: go
    out: gen
    opt: paths=source_relative
  - plugin: connect-go
    out: gen
    opt: paths=source_relative
```

With those configuration files in place, you can lint your schema and generate
code:

```bash
$ buf lint
$ buf generate
```

In your `gen` directory, you should now see some generated Go:

```
gen
└── greet
    └── v1
        ├── greet.pb.go
        └── greetv1connect
            └── greet.connect.go
```

The package `gen/greet/v1` contains `greet.pb.go`, which was generated by
Google's `protoc-gen-go`, and it contains the `GreetRequest` and `GreetResponse`
structs and the associated marshaling code. The package
`gen/greet/v1/greetv1connect` contains `greet.connect.go`, which was generated
by `protoc-gen-connect-go`, and it contains the HTTP handler and client
interfaces and constructors. Feel free to poke around if you're interested
&mdash; `greet.connect.go` is less than 100 lines of code, including comments.

## Implement handler

The code we've generated takes care of the boring boilerplate, but we still
need to implement our greeting logic. In the generated code, this is
represented as the `greetv1connect.GreetServiceHandler` interface. Since the
interface is so small, we can do everything in one Go package. `mkdir -p
cmd/server`, then add `cmd/server/main.go`:

```go
package main

import (
	"context"
	"fmt"
	"log"
	"net/http"

	"connectrpc.com/connect"
	"golang.org/x/net/http2"
	"golang.org/x/net/http2/h2c"

	greetv1 "example/gen/greet/v1" // generated by protoc-gen-go
	"example/gen/greet/v1/greetv1connect" // generated by protoc-gen-connect-go
)

type GreetServer struct{}

func (s *GreetServer) Greet(
	ctx context.Context,
	req *connect.Request[greetv1.GreetRequest],
) (*connect.Response[greetv1.GreetResponse], error) {
	log.Println("Request headers: ", req.Header())
	res := connect.NewResponse(&greetv1.GreetResponse{
		Greeting: fmt.Sprintf("Hello, %s!", req.Msg.Name),
	})
	res.Header().Set("Greet-Version", "v1")
	return res, nil
}

func main() {
	greeter := &GreetServer{}
	mux := http.NewServeMux()
	path, handler := greetv1connect.NewGreetServiceHandler(greeter)
	mux.Handle(path, handler)
	http.ListenAndServe(
		"localhost:8080",
		// Use h2c so we can serve HTTP/2 without TLS.
		h2c.NewHandler(mux, &http2.Server{}),
	)
}
```

As you've probably noticed, the `Greet` method uses generics: the
`connect.Request` and `connect.Response` types offer direct access to headers
and trailers, while still providing strongly-typed access to the generated
`greetv1.GreetRequest` and `greetv1.GreetResponse` structs. Generics simplify
many portions of Connect, and even let advanced users skip using
`protoc-gen-connect-go`.

In a separate terminal window, you can now update `go.mod` and start your
server:

```bash
$ go get golang.org/x/net/http2
$ go get connectrpc.com/connect
$ go run ./cmd/server/main.go
```

## Make requests

The simplest way to consume your new API is an HTTP/1.1 POST with a JSON
payload. If you have a recent version of cURL installed, it's a one-liner:

```bash
$ curl \
    --header "Content-Type: application/json" \
    --data '{"name": "Jane"}' \
    http://localhost:8080/greet.v1.GreetService/Greet
```

This responds:

```bash
{"greeting": "Hello, Jane!"}
```

Your new handler automatically supports gRPC requests, too:

```bash
$ grpcurl \
    -protoset <(buf build -o -) -plaintext \
    -d '{"name": "Jane"}' \
    localhost:8080 greet.v1.GreetService/Greet
```

This responds:

```bash
{
  "greeting": "Hello, Jane!"
}
```

We can also make requests using Connect's generated client. `mkdir -p
cmd/client` and put this in `cmd/client/main.go`:

```go
package main

import (
	"context"
	"log"
	"net/http"

	greetv1 "example/gen/greet/v1"
	"example/gen/greet/v1/greetv1connect"

	"connectrpc.com/connect"
)

func main() {
	client := greetv1connect.NewGreetServiceClient(
		http.DefaultClient,
		"http://localhost:8080",
	)
	res, err := client.Greet(
		context.Background(),
		connect.NewRequest(&greetv1.GreetRequest{Name: "Jane"}),
	)
	if err != nil {
		log.Println(err)
		return
	}
	log.Println(res.Msg.Greeting)
}
```

With your server still running in a separate terminal window, you can now run
your client:

```bash
$ go run ./cmd/client/main.go
```

Congratulations &mdash; you've built your first Connect service! 🎉

## Use the gRPC protocol instead of the Connect protocol

`connect-go` supports three protocols:

- The gRPC protocol that is used throughout the gRPC ecosystem, making
  `connect-go` [compatible](grpc-compatibility.md) with other gRPC implementations out of the box.
  `grpc-go` clients will work with `connect-go` servers and vice versa without
  issue - in fact, before `connect-go`'s public release, this is exactly what
  the [Buf CLI][buf-cli] was doing.
- The gRPC-Web protocol used by [grpc/grpc-web][grpc-web], allowing
  `connect-go` servers to interop with `grpc-web` frontends without the need
  for an intermediary proxy (such as Envoy).
- The new [Connect protocol](../protocol.md), a simple, HTTP-based protocol that
  works over HTTP/1.1 or HTTP/2. It takes the best portions of gRPC and gRPC-Web,
  including streaming, and packages them into a protocol that works
  equally well in browsers, monoliths, and microservices. The Connect protocol
  is what we think the gRPC protocol should be. By default, JSON- and
  binary-encoded Protobuf is supported.

By default, `connect-go` servers support ingress from all three protocols
without any configuration. `connect-go` clients use the Connect protocol by
default, but can use either the gRPC or gRPC-Web protocols by setting
the `WithGRPC` or `WithGRPCWeb` client options.

Edit `cmd/client/main.go` above to create the `GreetServiceClient` using the
`WithGRPC` option:

```go
client := greetv1connect.NewGreetServiceClient(
  http.DefaultClient,
  "http://localhost:8080",
  //highlight-next-line
  connect.WithGRPC(),
)
```

With your server still running in a separate terminal window, run the client
one more time:

```bash
$ go run ./cmd/client/main.go
```

Your output should remain the same, but `connect-go` is now using the gRPC
protocol instead of the Connect protocol to communicate over the wire.

## So what?

With just a few lines of hand-written code, you've built a real API server that
supports both the gRPC and Connect protocols. Unlike a hand-written REST
service, you didn't need to design a URL hierarchy, hand-write request and
response structs, manage your own marshaling, or parse typed values out of
query parameters. More importantly, your users got an idiomatic, type-safe
client without _any_ extra work on your part.

[buf]: https://buf.build/
[buf.gen.yaml]: https://buf.build/docs/configuration/v1/buf-gen-yaml
[buf.yaml]: https://buf.build/docs/configuration/v1/buf-yaml
[buf-cli]: https://github.com/bufbuild/buf
[cURL]: https://curl.se/
[godoc]: https://pkg.go.dev/connectrpc.com/connect
[go-releases]: https://golang.org/doc/devel/release
[grpc-web]: https://github.com/grpc/grpc-web
[install-go]: https://golang.org/doc/install
[protobuf]: https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers
